From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
80 recorded live Wednesday, September 5th, 2007.
Support for Hanselman it's is
provided by Tellerik already controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers
journal the world's leading Dutton
and developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott and
Carl discussed Vista 64. Hi,
this is Carl Franklin. You're listening
to Hansel minutes from handsome
and it's dot com. Scott
and I are here and
you're here. That means we
can get started. Hey Scott.
Hello, sir. Vista 64 Vista
64 Vista 64. People are
afraid of it. It's a,
it's a whole new world.
You got 32 extra bits
and it's very frightening. Now
you've been running 64 for
awhile, right? Can I tell
you something? I have only
run well, that's not true
on my desktop. I have
only run Vista 64. I
don't want on top. I
installed this to 32, but
64 ran better than 32.
Okay. But would it be
fair to say your initial
experience with this to 64
was not positive? No, exactly.
So I think what happened
was that the, the people
who would be the most
likely to use 64 were
the first people to install
it. And those are the
people who installed it the
day that it came out.
And there's nothing about 50
to 64. That is any
money, any more of a
problem than 32, except for
drivers. Right? Of course drivers
are the first, they're the
first thing to be, to
be not done. I'm afraid.
So initial experiences out of
box experience, they call that
a Microsoft, Oop, Oh, be
the out-of-box experience with VIX
Vista 64 was lousy. And
I think you had some
of those problems yourself. I
did. I'm using, you know,
audio drivers for not just
your standard consumer audio, but
pro audio systems from Mark
of the unicorn. And they
took a while to come
out. And not only that,
but I had a raid
Stripe that, that took awhile
to come out and the
drivers for motu still aren't
that good. I mean, I'm
still finding that I go
to record and the audio
device isn't there and I
have to reboot the audio
device, turn it off, turn
it back on for those
drivers to come back. So
this is which device, This
is a Mark of the
unicorn, M O T U
or motu. And the model
is 24 IO, which is
basically 24 balanced inputs and
outputs. Okay. So as a,
as a non audio file,
what I heard you say
was this is a blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah thing.
I've never heard of blah,
blah, blah, unstable drivers. Yeah,
that's right. Basically. That's exactly
it. It's a, it's a
pro audio rig and it
took a while for the,
for the drivers to come
out. It also took a
while for the Ray drivers
to come out for the,
at Korea. Is that how
you say a Rica? A
Cray? Yeah. It's a red
card that I have in
there. Okay. It took a
while for that to happen
too. It took a lot
longer, actually. So basically it
all comes down to the
drivers. And this is, this
has been my experience with,
with this 64 and Jeff
Atwood did a great job
of helping me get my
super machine hooked up. We
tried to pick name brand
stuff. And that's why I
was teasing you about the,
the V the sound card,
because, you know, I've never
heard of that company. I'm
sure that they're lovely. And
amongst sound card companies, they're
probably the greatest sound card
in the universe. Yeah. Not
consumer grade pro grade. Okay.
Exactly. Pro great stuff, but
it all still comes down
to that, that driver stuff.
So you've got to get
all those coders up to
speed. They've got to test
the hell out of it
and they've got to get
it signed. Right. Was it
as it was assigned driver
That's right. All the 64
drive bit drivers have to
be signed. And, you know,
that's something that even XP
32 driver makers never bothered
to do. If you ever
noticed a you're installing something
and you get the infamous
style log that says warning,
this driver is not signed.
We don't know if it's
actually valid because nobody bothered
to do it. Yeah. Because
you're basically just trusting them
and it's one extra step.
It just happens to be
a step they don't worry
about. Sometimes you'll see a
installation program say just before
the dialogue pops up, Hey,
a scary dialogue is going
to happen. Trust us. And
push. Yes. And that's their,
that's the equivalent to them
signing it. Exactly. Yeah. So
I've just right. Clicked on
computer management. And I'm clicking
on the device manager to
take a look at some
of the devices that I've
got here. I've got an
Nvidia G-Force 8,600 GTS. I've
got the Nvidia serial ATA
controller. So my motherboard is
a controller that is using
the Nvidia chip set. And
that this was all kind
of part of Jeff's master
plan, because I said that
I needed this thing to
be fast as possible, but
I need it to be
stable. I just can't have
this thing blue screen. So
I don't want to go
and fight with some funky
driver that I'm not used
to. So it's got a
very, very, very standard chip
set. It's got a very,
very standard and supportive video
card, you know, really, if
you're not using Nvidia or
ATI video cards, what are
you using? Things like the
FireWire, they're all the standard,
you know, via chips and
stuff like that. You know,
even the monitors I picked
all Dell all the same.
I just want everything clean.
I just did not want.
And then the, the networking
controllers and, and force. So
this really minimize my exposure
to mix mixing and matching
drivers. Right. We've just got
the Nvidia chip set for
the networking controller for the
SJTA stuff. The, the sound
controller is a, is a,
is a basic controller comes
and shows up in, in
Vista here as a high
definition audio device. It's so
it's so boring and plain,
and I haven't had really
great experience with, with Vista
64. Haven't had any problems.
Although I have heard a
number of people because they're
getting four gigs of Ram
or more on their machines
have really, really slow installs.
Apparently there are a couple
of motherboards that have got
a bit of a firmware
bug where during the installation
period, they'll blue screen, not
sure why, and almost universally
I've heard, if you just
dropped down to two gigs
of Ram, take out a
sticker too, for the installation
and then put them back
in. You're fine. Something's going
on during the setup process?
I don't know if you
had that issue as well.
I have eight gigs of
Ram and I didn't have
a slow setup. In fact,
the setup was one of
the more painless setups that
I've ever had. Although I
did have the experience, you
know, when Vista boots it,
if it's got a network
connection, I believe it's, it
goes out and tries to
install updates before it boots.
Yeah. Looking for drivers and
things like that. Right. So,
which is very cool. And
it took a really long
time in the beginning to
get it up and running.
In fact, I thought it
was hung. So I would
just, I just left it
go overnight and came back
in in the morning and
it was at the prompt.
That's cool. And it also
did something nice if it's
at the prompt and waiting
for you to log in,
it powers down powers down
the machine. So when you
come back in, you turn
on the machine, boom, it's
right up. Yeah. This is
an interesting thing to point
out. Now. I, it may
be just Vista specific, but
I have had really great
experiences with, with X 64.
I can't speak about this
being 64 or X 86,
but as far as hibernate
and sleep, it really, it
really works. Now you can
actually put a machine to
sleep and it will come
back. And I believe it
has to do with just
the firmware. It has to
do that. I know. What
is that called ACPI? Yeah.
The power control system, Power
management spec for firmware. I
think it's like ACPI level
two or something like that
have had really great experiences
with the machine, not falling
asleep and dying. You know,
how sometimes machines tend to
die in their sleep when
it comes to windows. One
of the things that I've
been monitoring and this particular
machine more than I did
on any other Vista machine
is the reliability and performance
monitor. I don't know if
you've done that. Have you
seen this? Are you in
front of a Vista machine
now? Not in front of
a Vista machine. Now You
go to your Vista machine
and you type in reliability,
not you, but everybody else
you'll get the perf Mon.
And then the perf on
the left side, there, there's
actually a reliability monitor. And
this is a really great
little kind of not hidden,
but certainly not advertised thing
about Vista. And it's got
a system stability chart and
it tracks five different aspects
of the system, software installs
and uninstalls application failures, hardware
failures, windows failures, and miscellaneous
failures. And then it gives
you a one to 10
about how stable your system
is. So looking at my
system from when I first
installed it in July 21st, I
can click on that date
on this scrolling chart. And
I can see all the
different things that I installed
for that day drivers and
everything had no failures at
all from the 21st of July until
the 2nd of August. And I can
see that I had a
system stability rating of 10,
and then I'm going along
and going along. And then
I see an X here
where, mm actually knows his
enemy, MMC dot exe crashed.
So then that lowered my
stability rating. Cause you can
only get a stability rating
of 10, if nothing crashes.
That means nothing at all.
Okay. So when I go
and go and I go,
and then I had, what
was this one? Dev dev
em. So I was running
a beta version of the
developer environment and I had
that dye and it lowered
my stability rating. And then
those stability ratings go back
up as fewer things crash
to make sense. So I've
had no hardware failures at
all that entire row is
blank. Nothing has gone wrong.
We had one miscellaneous failure
says disruptive shut down. The
computer was not shut down
properly. And this was because
one of my ups has
failed. So it keeps track
of all those different things.
And it keeps track of
what you installed on what
day. And it really gave
me a lot of insight
and some of the background
things I can go back
and see the date that
a particular KB was installed.
I can see when I
installed my, my wireless keyboard
and things like that right
now, I've got a stability
index of 6.3 and it's
climbing because I've installed a
bunch of new stuff in
the last couple of days
that I've been playing around
with some of the betas
and whatnot, but it has
been a really, really useful
thing. And I would encourage
people to, to look at
the stability charts under the
reliability monitor on their existing
Vista machines and then compare
it to their Vista 64
machines. And I haven't had
any problems. S S P
one just came out or
it was at a beta
of S P one that
just came out. So B
beta invitations for SB. One
just came out. If you
were in on the wind
30 on the windows server
system, 2003 beta or a
number of other betas, you
may have received an email
from connect.microsoft.com saying that you
could opt in to the,
the, the beta for the
service pack for Vista. Yeah.
Okay. So they're saying it'll
probably be, I think they
announced January, February next, next
year. I don't know about
you, but if running a
Vista machine for a mission
critical, I'm not going to
install betas of services. Yeah.
I think that the idea
of a beta of a
service pack, it's just not
something that I'm willing to
do. Certainly not a machine
that I need. I mean,
I need this machine to
be up all the time.
So, but at the same
time, I think, you know,
and then this is just
an early adopter speaking, but
I think it's silly to
not, to not install it
now. I mean, if, if
your drivers are available, the
idea of, well, I'll wait,
I'll wait for service pack
one, right? People are saying
that because they think that
it's obviously not ready for
prime time today, but it'll,
you know, it'll be ready
later and it doesn't quite,
it doesn't quite work like
that. You know how this
milk is bad. Maybe it'll
be better later. I'll put
it back in the fridge.
You know, it's, it's an
ongoing thing. You've got Tuesday
patches that come out all
the time. Remember just last
week, there were two new
hotfixes for Vista that fixed
the long copy times problem.
Yeah. Made a huge difference.
The long copy time problem
was a real irritant Vista
where if you were copying
a very large file, it
would spend all this time
calculating how long it would
take and a lot less
time copying. And you'd get
these really low bit rates
when copying large files across
the network. Right. You'd get
a hang on calculating, remaining
time when it gets to
99% and hang there for
a long time. Yeah. Huge
irritant fixed. So one of
the things I think people
kind of forget about is
that service pack one is
going to be a roll
up of a lot of
these things. There are going
to add some stuff in
service pack one, but it's,
it's not like it's going
to be a massively different
from the ongoing patched version
of something. So it's kind
of something to think about.
The other thing I know
about Vista from talking to
Richard, Richard Campbell, cohost of Dutton
and rocks, you know who
I'm talking about. He, he
discovered a problem with the
TCP IP V six stack
that interferes with the networking
for IPV four, which is
what most, everybody in the
world uses. So, and that
can cause network slow down.
It can cause a hanging.
And the, the solution is
to just disable IP. You
know, that there's a there's
problems with Firefox right now
when it comes to debugging
under visual studio and also
disabling IPV six makes, makes
things better. You know, if
you're not using IPV six.
Yeah. I pretty much disabled
anything that I'm not using.
If I can, if I
can get away with it.
Yeah. There should be out
there. You know how you,
we have batch files that
we pass around the RD,
RDS, pass them around there.
Sure. You know how to
turn off or shut off
all non-critical Yeah. I've got
one called clean processes dot
bad. I run it before
I give a presentation. Exactly.
Because net stop shuts down
the stuff I don't need
for a presentation. So do
you have one for Vista
as well? You know, I
don't, because so far there
hasn't been anything I didn't
need to have running, you
know, this machine doesn't have
wireless, so I don't have
to shut down the wireless
zero configuration. Yeah. That'd be
a nice PowerShell script. Huh?
It would just call net
net shut down and net
service. But I've been running
this thing almost like a
server. I keep it really,
really clean. I had, like
I had said, when I
blogged about the initial purchase
that I wasn't going to
pollute this thing at all.
Let me see if I
look at my virtual machines
here. If I bring up
my VMs, it's like, we
woke up at seven VMs
right now. Yeah. You were
telling me this at the,
at my birthday party, actually
that you use Vista just
as a launching platform for
virtual machines and 64 V
64 is perfect for that.
And that's, that's one of
the whole reasons that I
use the 64 bit operating
systems in general is because
you know, working in VMs
is really fast. When you
have a memory, when you
have a Ram available With
four gigs of Ram, my
ex PVM, again, running on
an external hard drive is
at least as fast, if
not faster than my, my
old Pentium four, which is
really cool. So I'm looking
here, I've got one, two,
three windows XP VMs. I've
got one that I put
all my crazy tools in.
If I'm going to test
the tool, I'll test it
in a VM now, because
of course you can just
drag the tool directly from
the bookstore onto the VM.
At that sounds like a
silly, silly feature to tout.
But the fact that I
could just drag and drop
onto the surface of the
VM and copy of file
PC or using virtual PC,
I understand that VMware is
a little bit faster, but
I really dislike virtual PCs
is simple. It's out of
the way I don't sweat
it. Yeah. I've got a
fresh windows XP service pack.
Two that I do testing
on application that needs to
run on a, on a
fresh machine, got a windows
98 machines. So I can
talk my Newton. I've got
a copy of who Boone
two that I've been playing
with mano and Moonlight. The
Silverlight for Linux got a
rails VM. So this is
one for doing just Ruby
on rails. And then I've
got an old, when this
is actually still, I don't
actually use this VM, but
it's, it's basically a dash
6.2 windows 3.1 VM, use
it for games, you know,
just cause it's fun to
see running sounds so I
don't actually use it. So
not seven. I've actually got
six. And then I've got
that. When that a 3.1,
one thing though that I
did do that I didn't
expect I would was I
didn't sell a couple of
games on the thing I
had said I was gonna
keep it really clean, but
I installed a Guild Wars
works great. And one thing
I was actually pleasantly surprised
that I installed steam steam
of course, is the half-life
two game launcher. Half-life two
has a 64 bit process.
If you run it once
it re it notices that
you're on a 64 bit
machine and then downloads the
64 bit version of half
flight too. And you can
tell when a process is
64 bit, by going into
the windows task manager, clicking
on the processes tab and
any process that is a
32 bit process has an
asterick 32 by it. And
then anything that's a 64
bit process doesn't have that.
So I watched the HL
two half-life two dot exe
switch from a 32 bit
processor, 64 bit processor, so
I can use memory more
effectively. And then it also
one of things that's nice
about the steam engine and
the half flight two engine
is that it uses all
four processors on a quad
proc Jeff Atwood over at
coding. horror.com has got a
great article this week about,
do you actually get a
speed increase with dual core
versus quad core? And it
really comes down to whether
or not the application was
written to a, to do
that. Well, Scott, speaking of
nonsequitors, I got a story
for you. So I have
two machines here that I
recently bought for the new
studio for my two editors,
Lawrence Ryan, and Brandon wen who
work on the shows here,
Paul productions. So I decided
to get all the parts
from new egg and put
them together, which is something
I like to do. I,
you know, I went in
phases. I started out in
life loving to build machines.
And then for a while
there, it was just a
nightmare and I didn't want
to deal with it. And
now I'm back to liking
it again. But so I
put these machines together and
we fired them up and
they started using them and
they were blue screening. And
that's when we started talking
about doing a blue screen
debugging show on DNR TV.
And I thought, Oh, how
fortuitous is this? Let's do
this. Saw one of them
blue screen in the wild.
I watched it. Yeah. Right.
So, and, and the blue
screens got more and more
frequent. And we, I actually
looked up the codes and
they were just completely random
one. There was three codes
that it was blue screening
with. One was unknown error,
which is always fun. And
the other is some obscure
error that when you look
it up on the website
on Microsoft's website, it says
something like, you know, millions
of things could cause this,
Right? Yeah. So at this
point you can't trust your
machine, right? This is the
thing about blue screens, right?
It's like fine. It's eye
catching your wife, cheating on
you. You know, you just,
you can never trust them
again. My machine is as
hard as failed. No, not
my wife. I'm just saying
that my wife cheating on
you. Wait a second, wait
a second. Now what I'm
saying is that when, when
a machine blue screens, it's,
it's a violation of your
trust. You put your trust
into the mr. Machine. Well,
there's that too, but I'm
thinking more philosophically, right? I
know. Yeah, you're right. You
can't trust the machine. So
if it blue screens, once
in a, in a few
months, you might chalk it
up to a bug, but
if it blue screens fairly
regularly, you're thinking, okay, there's
a problem. So this is
a very interesting story and
I'll share it with you.
So weird things were happening
on these machines. Like a
video was not refreshing on
the desktop and you could
take a window and move
it all around the desktop
and it would leave trails.
That was one thing that
would happen. Randomly. Another thing
that would happen was one
of the guys would go
to do a mix down
from, which is when you
take all the multiple, multiple
tracks that are happening all
at once with different pan
and volume settings and all
that. And you combine them
into a single stereo track.
And in, in a portion
of the mixdown where you
would expect, see a conversation,
there was just pink noise,
which is just like every
frequency, just complete random noise.
And for, for a serious
block of a chunk of
it, That sounds like it
sounds like just memory just
dumped itself into it, into
a file. Well, that's exactly
what gave me that hint
that I thought it was
memory because it looked like
it just got the wrong
address somewhere and, or the
memory was corrupt in. And
so I'm thinking it was
Ram swap the Ram out.
So I, I didn't swap
the Ram out. I, the
first thing I did was
I went to back to
new egg and I looked
at the comments that people
leave for the products that
they buy. Ah, one of
the greatest things ever done.
It was for the motherboard.
I checked for the motherboard.
And that was the first
thing I checked. And the
comments for the first guy
said, pros, good motherboard, blah,
blah, blah cons. I had
to manually adjust the SPD
settings and manually tweak it
to get this board stable.
Now what the SPD settings
are, some sort of a
nuke probably know more about
this, but it's like a
speed matching for the Ram.
It's like a multiplier for
the Ram to get it
to sync correctly to the
motherboard. Is that correct? Yep.
Yeah. And so it's set
to auto in the bios,
right? And then there's a
couple other options starting from
2.0, to 3.3 to 2.5,
right? Yeah. Yeah. SPD is
a basically it's good sculpt
serial presence detect. And it's,
it's a little tiny EEPROM
that's on the memory module
itself. And it keeps track
of all the speed information
about the, about that memory.
And you use programs there's
different Ram Ram checking program
that you can use. And
if you have the wrong
data in that SPD systems
will crash. Typically it's not
something you're supposed to have
to change. Right. It's supposed
to, the motherboard is supposed
to use that data to
configure the access to the
memory module. Exactly. The module
is supposed to come programmed
correctly. So that's very odd.
So before I went and
tweaked it, because I don't
want to tweak things to
that, know what I'm doing.
I downloaded the Microsoft Ram
tester, the memory test or
utility from Microsoft, Microsoft specific
utility. Yeah. Microsoft specific utility,
you download it. You Buddhist,
you make a boot CD
rom or floppy. My case
was CD rom it boots
up and it just exercises
Ram. And it tells you
how many failures, how many
passes. And it just keeps
running until you press a
key. And within the first
minute failure, failure, failure, failure.
Well, so I went and
I set the SPD setting
to the second highest value.
And at first I set
it to the lowest value
and that worked. Then I
set it to the second
highest value thinking, well, you
know, the highest one is
probably giving me the problem.
I'll try the second highest.
Right. She just backed it
off a notch. It's almost
like when there were problems
with video drivers and you
would go to that performance
slider and you'd pull it
back one that's it well
worked. So, and you have
no problems. I haven't had
a problem since I haven't
had a problem since they've
been humming along for a
week and a half. Wow.
That's, that's obscure. How is
anyone supposed to figure that
out? You know, exactly. If
that guy hadn't left a
comment on a, a newegg.com
I would been, I would've
probably sent them back, you
know, or tried to, I
think you've pegged on one
of the really, really valuable
things about, about the internet
specifically for buying hardware. If
you're going to build your
own machine, don't just take
the recommendations of friends or
me or whoever. But look
at the comments, you know,
especially if you've got a
hundred plus comments about a
piece of hardware, such a
fountain of information can be
found in, in sites like
new egg sites, like Amazon,
where they allow someone to
have a review and more
and more people are doing
their reviews in that format,
pros and cons pros. You
know, here's, what's great. Here's,
what's not allowing you to
make a really educated decision
about it. And we tried
to do that when I
put together this machine, because
you know, with a Dell,
they're going to be a
little more conservative. They're going
to put together a series
of components. Some Dell made
some purchased that are going
to give you a good
experience, but a conservative experience.
We wanted to go a
little, a little beyond that,
but you know, I don't
know if this motherboard is
going to hate that memory,
which is going to hate
that video card. So that's
perfect. So you didn't have
to just swap you didn't
just swap memory by new
memory. It was just a
setup. Well, it was like
it was happening on both
machines and they had the
same kind of Ram, same
kind of everything. And yeah,
the motherboard was the first
place I looked just so
happened. That was it. Fantastic.
Well, Scott, I think that's
a show. I think that's
a show. Alright. It's been
a pleasure as always. Alright,
I'll see you next week
and that's for you. Dear
listener. We'll see you next
time on Hansel minutes.